diff: update docs according to the new patch (#953)
iterative/dvc.org: public/static/docs/command-reference/diff.md

# diff

Show added, modified, or deleted DVC-tracked files and directories between
commits in the <abbr>DVC repository</abbr>, or between a commit and the
workspace.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc diff [-h] [-q | -v]
                [--show-json] [--show-hash]

>                 [a_rev] [b_rev]

Reviewer: I prefer this way for readability ... split by function arguments do

positional arguments:
  a_rev      Old Git commit to compare (defaults to HEAD)
  b_rev      New Git commit to compare (defaults to the current workspace)
```

## Description

Output files and directories added, modified, deleted in a Git commit `b_rev` as
compared to another Git commit `a_rev`. Both `a_rev` and `b_rev` accept any
[Git revision]("https://git-scm.com/docs/gitrevisions") - branch or tag name,

> Git commit hash, etc.

Reviewer: > Prints a list of the files and directories added...

👍 

> from Git commit `a_rev` to a later Git commit `b_rev`

they are not sorted in any way, so probably `later` does not apply here

> Git commit hash, etc.

Reviewer 2: I thought A has to be before B, same as in `metrics diff`, thus they're described as "old" and "new" in the help output. I just tested thought and I see that's not the case so you're right, no "later".

> Git commit hash, etc.

Reviewer 2: I guess we should also update the positional argument description (both here and in the core repo's help output strings) to something like `a_rev   A Git commit`, `a_rev   Another Git commit`?  I'll open a separate review comment for this...

It defaults to comparing the current workspace and the last commit (`HEAD`), if
arguments `a_rev` and `b_rev` are not specified.

> Options `--show-hash` and `--show-json` can be used to modify format and details

Reviewer 2: Minor: maybe mention `show-json` first.

Reviewer: 👍

> of the output produced. See the details and example below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the output produced. See the **Options** and **Examples** sections below for more details.
```
(Needs rewrap.)

`dvc diff` does not have an effect when the repository is not tracked by Git,

> for example when `dvc init` was used with the `--no-scm` option.

Reviewer 2: > `dvc diff` does not have an effect... when `dvc init` was used with the `--no-scm` option

Somewhat unrelated but actually, I checked and this isn't correct. You can create a git repo, then a `dvc init --no-scm` in it, `dvc add` a data file, commit (A); change and `dvc add` the data file again, commit (B), and `dvc diff HEAD^` will work.

Is this buggy behavior? If not, we just need to rewrite the paragraph above to something more correct.

Reviewer: it feels more or less correct to me - the main thing here is `when the repository is not tracked by Git`. In your example it is tracked by Git, right? unless I'm missing something.

Reviewer 2: Yes it's tracked by Git, but I initialized the DVC project with `dvc init --no-scm`. The paragraph above reads ``...`dvc diff` does not have an effect... for example when `dvc init` was used with the `--no-scm` option`` but it does have an effect, as long as there is a Git repo underneath. Maybe just remove the part about `--no-scm` in the paragraph?

Reviewer 2: But this makes me wonder whether `dvc init --no-scm` should actually check that there's no `git/` dir or something – totally unrelated now 😬

Reviewer 2: Turns out there's an issue for this: #2472.

Reviewer: It's fine, I still don't see a problem. It's intuitively clear what does it mean, even if implementation is not 100% correct and allows to have a mix of Git and --no-scm.

Reviewer 2: Hmmm OK but just removing that last incorrect statement wouldn't hurt either.

# diff

Show added, modified, or deleted DVC-tracked files and directories between
commits in the <abbr>DVC repository</abbr>, or between a commit and the
workspace.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc diff [-h] [-q | -v]
                [--show-json] [--show-hash]
                [a_rev] [b_rev]

positional arguments:
  a_rev      Old Git commit to compare (defaults to HEAD)

>   b_rev      New Git commit to compare (defaults to the current workspace)

Reviewer 2: > Per https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/953#discussion_r383098998

Not "old" or "new". Just "A" and "Another" or something like that...

- [ ] I can send a PR to the core repo with whatever you come up with here.

Reviewer: let's create a ticket in the core repo and update the document when the ticket is done

Reviewer: (I just don't see this as a big issue worth spending time now tbh)

Reviewer 2: Well, there's already a lot of diff issues in that repo. I think I'll just submit a draft PR directly instead and see what the core team thinks...

```

## Description

> Prints files and directories added, modified, deleted in a Git commit `b_rev` as

Reviewer 2: Prints files sounds like maybe it `cat`s the file contents to me. That's why I suggested "Prints a list of files..."

Reviewer: yep, good!

## Examples

> For these examples we can use the [Get Started](/doc/get-started) repository.

Reviewer 2: Good simplification. I would go with
```suggestion
For these examples we can use the [Get Started](/doc/get-started) project.
```

p.s. this can probably be changed in several other docs as well.

<details>

> ### Click and expand to setup the examples project

Reviewer 2: Maybe just `...the example` like in line 105?

p.s. the `import-url` cmd ref could also use this update 🙂

Reviewer: don't want to go with other pages... I hope all these setup instructions will go away soon

Start by cloning our example repo if you don't already have it:

```dvc
$ git clone https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started
$ cd example-get-started
```

Download data using:

```dvc
$ dvc fetch -T
Preparing to download data from 'https://remote.dvc.org/get-started'
...
```

The `-T` flag passed to `dvc fetch` makes sure we have all the data files
related to all existing tags in the repo. You take a look at the
[available tags](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started/tags) of our

> example repo.

Reviewer 2: `You may see the available tags of our example repo [here](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started/tags).`

</details>

## Example: Checking workspace changes

> The minimal `dvc diff`, run without arguments, defaults to comparing DVC-tacked

Reviewer 2: Oops! tacked -> tracked

> files between `HEAD` (current Git commit) and the current <abbr>workspace</abbr>

Reviewer 2: current Git commit -> last Git commit ?

(uncommitted changes, if any):

```dvc
$ dvc diff
```

> It produces an empty result if there are no changes to any files or

> > directories in the current workspace.

Reviewer 2: No need for block quote, I think.

Reviewer 2: And maybe
`... in the current workspace, which we just cloned and pulled.`
?

Reviewer: going to remove this, tbh ... don't like there back-references to the setup instructions ... ideally examples should be self descriptive. Will do another update when I deal with Katacoda.

## Example: Comparing workspace with arbitrary commits

<details>

### Click and expand to setup the example

Let's checkout the
[3-add-file](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started/releases/tag/3-add-file)
tag, corresponding to the [Add Files](/doc/get-started/add-files) _Get Started_
chapter, right after we added `data.xml` file with DVC:

```dvc
$ git checkout 3-add-file
$ dvc pull
```

</details>

To see the difference between the very previous commit of the project and the
workspace, we can use `HEAD^` as `a_ref`:

```dvc
$ dvc diff HEAD^
Added:
    data/data.xml

files summary: 1 added, 0 deleted, 0 modified
```

## Example: Comparing tags or branches

<details>

### Click and expand to setup the example

Our example repository has the `bigrams-experiment` and `baseline-experiment`
[tags](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started/tags) respectively to

> reference these experiments.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention `baseline-experiment` first above? And:

`...tags, that reference two different modeling experiments.`

> Having followed the previous example's setup, move into the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having followed the first example's setup, move into the
```

Reviewer: I think it's better to omit it completely. Also, this will be removed soon.

`example-get-started/` directory. Then make sure that you have the latest code
and data with the following commands.

```dvc
$ git checkout master
```

</details>

```dvc
$ dvc diff baseline-experiment bigrams-experiment
Modified:
    auc.metric
    data/features/
    data/features/test.pkl
    data/features/train.pkl
    model.pkl

files summary: 0 added, 0 deleted, 4 modified
```

The output from this command confirms that there's a difference in 4 files
between the tags `baseline-experiment` and `bigrams-experiment`.

## Example: Using different output formats

> Same command as above but using JSON output and include hash values for files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's use the same command as above, but with JSON output and including hash values:
```

and directories:

```dvc
$ dvc diff --show-json --show-hash \
           baseline-experiment bigrams-experiment
```

> outputs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It outputs:
```

## Examples

For these examples we can use the [Get Started](/doc/get-started) project.

<details>

### Click and expand to setup the project to run examples

Start by cloning our example repo if you don't already have it:

```dvc
$ git clone https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started
$ cd example-get-started
```

Download data using:

```dvc
$ dvc fetch -T
Preparing to download data from 'https://remote.dvc.org/get-started'
...
```

The `-T` flag passed to `dvc fetch` makes sure we have all the data files
related to all existing tags in the repo. You may see the available tags of our
example repo [here](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started/tags).

</details>

## Example: Checking workspace changes

The minimal `dvc diff`, run without arguments, defaults to comparing DVC-tracked
files between `HEAD` (last Git commit) and the current <abbr>workspace</abbr>

> (uncommitted changes, if any):

Reviewer 2: One more thing, actually!

> current workspace (uncommitted changes

So. I thought about this again and I think that we could make the distinction between this command and `dvc status` clearer by calling them "changes in the workspace (not yet tracked by DVC)" in status, and "current workspace (tracked but uncommitted changes)" here in diff. It's not the simplest language but at least it's a first attempt at clarifying this discrepancy between commands and their purpose.

What do you think Ivan?

p.s. I'm already updating `dvc status` along these lines in PR #1014

Reviewer: it's super confusing. As well as using "uncommitted changes, if any". Not sure that `changes in the workspace (not yet tracked by DVC)` is correct, also not sure this the right place to discuss `dvc status` that probably should be reviewed holistically.

You are right that this phrase should changed. I would wait for the discussion in one of the `dvc diff` tickets to complete. It'll be the next iteration of this doc.
